Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the,
the Center. I'm your host, Ricardo Lops. And today
I'm joined by Doctor David. David Pins off. He's
a research scientist at UCL, a, the University of
California, Los Angeles. And his research focuses on evolutionary
psychology, political psychology, public opinion and sexual behavior. And
today we're focusing mostly on political belief systems, the
meaning of life, morality and some other related topics.
So David, welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to everyone.
The pleasure is all mine, Ricardo, I'm a big
fan of the podcast and I'm very happy to
be on it.
Great. Thanks. So, starting with the fun stuff, let's
talk about political belief systems then. So, I mean,
I guess that uh if you talk with political
scientists and philosophers, uh when it comes to explaining
how political belief systems work, where they come from,
they would give you a, I don't know, a
highly intellectualized version of it based on abstract values
and how they are so coherent and so on.
But since you come from an evolutionary psychology perspective,
how do you approach it? Exactly.
Yeah. So um I have a kind of cheeky
blog called Everything Is Bullshit. Uh And part of
the shtick there is to call bullshit on things.
And um you could describe my academic paper, uh
strange bedfellows, the alliance theory of, of political belief
systems as a way of calling bullshit on that
prevailing view of political ideology. So, um I really
take aim at the idea that uh liberalism or
conservatism as they manifest in contemporary American society or
other Western nations uh represent uh coherent belief systems,
reflect moral principles, reflect well thought out philosophies. Um
I think they are much more strategic uh chaotic
random uh than, than that. Um And I'd be
happy to get into the details of, of uh
how I'm grounding out that view.
OK. So, uh but just before we get into
your view and start exploring it, what would you
say are some of the most common explanations that
people bring to the table when trying to explain
where political belief systems come from?
Yeah. So I'd say broadly speaking, the most common
approach to political belief systems is to point to
some essential difference between people on either side of
the political spectrum. Um So maybe that essential difference
has to do with one's personality or one's psychological
dispositions. Uh ONE'S uh traits, one's um uh personal
idiosyncrasies and quirks the way one sees the world.
Um And that's one common way of, of looking
at it. Um The other way of looking at
it uh is to say that they, they really
pertain to differences in moral values. So, one of
the most prominent approaches in this area is Jonathan
Heights Moral Foundations theory, which says that liberals and
conservatives uh rely on different moral foundations that is
uh have a monomaniac egalitarian and harm focused uh
ideology. Whereas conservatives uh rely on all six moral
foundations from uh in group out group psychology to
uh to uh purity and authority. Um And roughly,
I think a lot of people in political psychology
would agree that there are deep seated moral differences
between liberals and conservatives. Republicans and Democrats, left wing,
left wing, right wing uh et cetera. Uh And
uh and, and it's those abstract moral values that
color and explain uh the contents of our political
belief systems. They are the common thread that ties
all our beliefs together. Uh And I think that
is mistaken
and what would you say are some of the
biggest weaknesses, at least in your view when it
comes to hypotheses that are based on or try
to explain political belief systems on the basis of
abstract values. Because I mean, it seems to me
that sometimes people are trying to talk about abstract
values and not necessarily just moral values, but some
other sorts of political values uh as if they
were like sort of separate from the rest of
our psychology and based on just pure rational philosophy
or something like that. So, what are your thoughts
on that.
Sure. Yeah. Um I think the biggest problem with
that view is that it's just fundamentally evolutionarily implausible.
So if you, if you, if you actually look
at what people who believe in these abstract values
are saying, uh usually what they're saying is that
these values are not self interested, they're not helping
a person advance their power or status or access
to resources. They're not in the interests of one's
self or one's kin. Uh But they're also not
group interested either. Um Because if they were, then
we would strategically endorse whatever values support our political
allies and reject them or flout them when they
serve the interests of our political rivals. And when
we have a wide variety of heterogeneous political allies,
as we do uh in uh modern democracies with
complex political coalitions, then we're going to see uh
the strategic endorsement of moral values in one case
to support one's allies and the rejection of that
moral value uh when it happens to support our
rivals. And so that is basically identical to alliance
theory that these values are not really held consistently,
but are used strategically to support the interests of
one's allies and oppose the interests of one's rivals.
But the problem is if these abstract values are
not in our self interest and they're not in
our political allies, interests or our group's interests, then
that really rules out the only possible mechanisms by
which these values could have evolved, uh you know,
Darwin once famously said that um um something along
the lines of uh uh things don't exist merely
for the sake of beauty or for the sake
of mere variety. Um They don't exist to delight
man or the creator, right? And if, and if
you could show that that uh the properties of
an animal exhibited these uh benevolent properties, uh then
that would be absolutely fatal to the theory of
evolution. And I think a lot of people in
political psychology are taking that kind of evolutionarily implausible
view that we have these high minded values that
are nobly designed to make the world a better
place. But that's just not the kind of thing
that can evolve by natural selection. And so I
think we actually need to get a bit more
cynical about our uh supposed moral values in the
same way that we're cynical about the mission statements
and N pr campaigns of big corporations. I don't
think anyone thinks that Starbucks is actual goal is
to uh uh nourish and inspire the human spirit,
as it says on their website. I think most
people went trying to predict what Starbucks is going
to do next, uh are going to ask themselves
what, what will make Starbucks the most money. And
I think we need to view humans in a
similar way. I think we need to view the
quote unquote mission statements of design to mobilize supporters.
Uh AND they, uh, we, we really have no
reason to think that they, they represent nobly designed
impartially, altruistic, uh, world views. I think that's fundamentally,
uh evolutionarily and functionally implausible.
And a very interesting question here is if people's
political beliefs are even consistent, there is, and of
course, that might mean different things. But I guess
that what people mean by consistent theory is that,
for example, if someone say, says they are from
the left or from the right, or a Republican,
a democrat or libertarian, an a, an authoritarian or
something like that, that uh there's sort of a,
a checklist and they check all the points when
it comes to the political beliefs that you usually
associate with either side of the political spectrum. But
uh I mean, there, there are, I guess very
good criticisms of that, for example, back in 2018,
I interviewed Robert Kurzban and he has a very
good book about that and the sort of shows
I think to some extent that people are not
really consistent, at least if we look at things
from, uh I mean, expecting that people again, check
all of the boxes when it comes to a
particular political ideology. And there are things that perhaps
even if I, for example, identify as a Republican,
I might agree with some points on some points
with the Democrats and vice versa. So are people's
political beliefs really consistent or not?
Yeah. Um So it's, it's a complicated question and
that, I think the way that a lot of
political scientists think about consistency is misguided. Um So
a lot of political scientists will think that, you
know, if you support, um, say, uh you know,
a Christian fundamentalist morality, you know, uh anti aora
uh anti recreational drugs, um, anti gay rights. And
you also endorse free market libertarianism that, that is
a consistent moral philosophy. Uh And if you, in
so far as you deviate from that, then you're
inconsistent. Um And I think that is just a
very wrong headed way of thinking about what it
means to be consistent. I think we should define
consistency in the straightforward way of having beliefs that
fit together coherently. Um And if you actually look
at the combination of Christian fundamentalism and, and free
market libertarianism, there's actually nothing consistent about it at
all. Um The only reason these philosophies go together
in the United States is because of a historically
contingent political alliance that arose in uh starting in
the 19 seventies between wealthy business people and uh
pro-life evangelicals. And that alliance does not exist in
many other countries. In fact, in other countries, you
see free market libertarianism being combined with um with
more, more secular ideology, with, with um with being
pro choice. Um And so this peculiar alliance that
exists in the United States is not a reflection
of some deep, you know, feature of human nature
that, that, that these issues have to go together.
Uh I think they are much more historically contingent
uh and arbitrary than we like to think. Um
And so I don't think that uh political belief
systems are consistent in the sense of reflecting coherent
philosophies or consistently held moral principles. And I go
through a lot of examples in the paper of,
of ideological inconsistencies that are really hard to explain
from that perspective, but easy to explain from my
perspective.
OK. But wait a minute, because at this point,
someone might come in and say, ok, but perhaps
that's true for just the general population. I mean,
the average citizen, the average voter is ignorant is
ill informed. They don't inform themselves about the politics,
about the political philosophy, the political science, they don't
read blah, blah blah. And so that's the main
reason why they say they are, for example, on
the right, but they have inconsistent beliefs, they might
believe in some things that are mostly associated with
the left and so on and vice versa as
well. But what about the, let's call them political
elites. And that would include, of course, the more
let's say, educated people, the people who actually read
the political philosophy, the political science and they want
to try to be or they say they want
to try to be as consistent as possible. Uh
And they are constantly informing themselves on the politics,
what's happening and so on the political alliances and
all of that. Uh I mean, our political elites,
the more educated people, the more informed people, more
consistent than just the general population.
Yeah. So that's generally the standard view in political
science, which is that the, the masses are, are
generally um uninformed or, or at the very least,
not as, as well informed as their elite counterparts.
Uh And they, they don't, they sort of lack
quote unquote ideological consistency. Uh And the dominant explanation
for, for, um mass opinion is that it's group
centric that is, it's rooted in uh sort of
uh group attachments, group prejudices, group allegiances, you know,
and their policy preferences really depend on, you know,
whether the policy is in groups they like or
groups they don't like. And if it's benefiting a
group, they like, then they like the policy. And
if it's benefiting a group, they don't like, then
they don't like it. And that's really the dominant
approach to explaining uh the uh political beliefs of
the mass public. Uh And what's interesting is that
the group attitudes of the mass public aren't, do,
not necessarily align with the group attitudes of political
elites that is they're much more chaotic and unpredictable.
Um What I want to argue is that the
political beliefs of elites are, in fact, just as
group centric as the political beliefs of the mass
public. It is just that there that the groups
around which they center uh are a different set
of groups uh and the uh and the beliefs
might be a more sophisticated set of rationalizations, befitting
of, of more intelligent, highly educated people. Um But
that's really the only difference that is, you see
these complex political coalitions and alliances and the most
politically informed people are most attentive to the details
of those political coalitions and are most willing to
align themselves with those coalitions and accommodate new alliances
and oppose the enemy of their enemy and befriend
the ally of their ally. Uh And that kind
of loyalty and engagement is what ultimately drives their
beliefs, their loyalty to the coalition as a whole,
not any kind of uh abstract philosophizing. Usually the
abstract philosophy comes as a justification or rationalization for
whatever serves the interests of their political coalition.
So we've been focusing mostly on people here but
uh talking about the belief systems themselves. And of
course, here again, we are coming from the presupposition
that there is a pure ideological belief system from
any sort of ideology here, which is also something
uh questionable or debatable. But uh are even the
belief systems, them themselves coherent because someone might say,
oh OK, so you're saying or earlier, you talked
about the example of some ideological inconsistencies when it
comes to, for example, uh rep Republicans in the
US. But people might say, OK, but that's just
a silly historical accident, but they are still uh
pure uh right wing ideology out there somewhere. And
when you look at it and if you're careful,
you can see that it's really coherent. But is
that really the case?
Yeah. So I think it's not the case and
you could go through any feature you want to
identify with, say right wing ideology or left wing
ideology. Um I go through three different proposed features
in, in the paper, um equality, authority and tolerance.
And I go through each feature and show how
uh the uh apparent uh moral principle or moral
moral value is actually not held consistently. And it's
only uh brought forward when it's in the interests
of one's political allies and it is flouted and
rejected when it happens to benefit other groups, uh
especially one's political rivals. Um So to take an
example from the equality domain, um liberals think it
is unfair that corporate CEO S uh make millions
of dollars a year, but they actually think it's,
uh it's fair for Hollywood movie stars to make
millions of dollars a year. Um And so that
would be an example of the type of ideological
inconsistency I'm talking about, especially when you consider the
fact that corporate CEO S are widely associated with
conservatives and Hollywood movie stars are widely associated with
liberals. And what's interesting is that, uh you actually
see the reversal among conservatives, conservatives actually think that
it's unfair for Hollywood movie stars to make millions
of dollars a year. And so as soon as
you swap in different groups that people feel allegiance
or rivalry towards. You see their supposed principles shift
and change flexibly. Another example from the equality domain,
we like to think that conservatives don't care about
disadvantaged groups. But when you say, should the government
do more to help small working class towns in
America's Heartland? That is very much a right wing
coded group and a majority of conservatives say yes,
the government should do more to help them. So
it's really not a matter of being in favor
of quality of equality or inequality in the abstract
or in general, it's really being strategically in favor
of it uh when it favors the interests of
one of one's allies and being strategically against it
when it favors the interests of one's rivals. And
I'm happy to go through some of the other
um supposed principles as well if you'd like me
to.
Oh yeah, sure. I mean, I was just about
to ask you because there's this idea that whatever
sort of principles are part of a specific political
ideology. I mean, the ideology itself derives from supposed
first principles. That is something that philosophers, for example,
talk a lot about. And in this particular case,
I guess that some political scientists would also argue
that. But I mean, you're making the case here
that that's not really the case they are based
or these ideologies are based on things like have
a justifications, rationalizations, moralization and so on. So perhaps
tell us a little bit more about that. And
if you have a few more examples to illustrate
this point.
Sure. So we can go through the idea of
um uh authoritarianism. Uh Another widely proposed view is
that right wing ideology is all about respecting authority
or obeying authority or um enforcing one's preferences on
others. Uh And that just does not make a
lot of sense at all. Um So if you
ask, you know, conservatives, whether we ought to respect
authority more, most of them would say yes. But
then if you ask them, if, if companies should
disobey government regulations that they think are unfair, a
majority of them will also say yes. So that's
another example of an inconsistency. So conservatives are um
are happy to say they support authority in the
abstract. But when it comes to specific authorities, like,
I don't know the IRS CDC, the EPA the
who um government regulators uh Democratic uh politicians, uh
even the FBI once they started investigating Donald Trump,
uh many uh Republicans turned against. Uh These are
a wide variety of authorities that Republicans reject and
disrespect. So I, I think it is very hard
to argue that they are holding a case. Um
And if you think that it's about exercising authority
over others, I think that's also hard to reconcile
with their actual opinions which involve uh you know,
uh deregulating um uh businesses, um environmental deregulation uh
uh uh having fewer restrictions during COVID-19. Uh These
are hard to reconcile with a general desire to
exercise authority over others. Um And if you look
at the desire to exercise authority over others in
terms of restricting their speech, uh you actually see
uh uh little to no differences at all between
liberals and conservatives that is people want to restrict
the speech of their political opponents, uh but not
their political allies. And you see that on both
sides of the political spectrum, if anything, there might
be a little bit of evidence that that is
more prominent on the left these days. So I
think it's hard to argue that that that authority
or a general desire to obey or exercise authority
is the unifying principle of right wing ideology. Um
So the other one is uh tolerance. So that
would be a um a, a kind of tribalism
or nationalism or um ethnocentrism that is supposed to
be uh more prevalent among, among right wing people.
And I think there, that's e equally at odds
with reality. Uh So if you ask conservatives whether
we ought to be more suspicious, uh and distrusting
of foreigners, uh most of them will say yes.
But then when you ask if we should trust
Vladimir Putin, when he said that he did not
interfere in the 2016 election, a majority of them
will also say yes. Uh So there's, that's quite
a stark inconsistency there that is, they think we
should be distrusting of foreigners. But when it comes
to AAA particular foreigner uh who, who, who is
a Russian autocrat and hostile, overtly hostile to the
United States, they seem to trust him quite readily.
Uh And so I think that is one of
many uh uh stark inconsistencies you see uh uh
uh on, on the right. Uh And I think
it's uh I list a few other examples in
the paper but um you could also see similar
inconsistencies on the left that is the left will,
will say that they value uh you know, uh
diversity and respecting the views of, of a variety
of different groups, but in fact, they disrespect the
views of uh any group that is mildly associated
with conservatives. So Christian fundamentalists pro-life people, uh uh
white people, men, uh uh wealthy business people, uh
these days, even uh pro-israeli people. Um So, uh
the respect for diversity is actually, um pretty restricted
to a list of groups that are, that are
left coded. Mhm.
Uh And I mean, I'm not sure if this,
what I'm about to say makes sense or not,
if it doesn't please correct me in whatever way
you think. Uh It makes sense. But, uh I
mean, even when it comes to some of the
supposed principles or at least the labels people come
up with sometimes to refer to some of their
values that supposedly orient their political ideology. Uh I
mean, sometimes with same label people from different sides
mean different things and they're also inconsistent within their
own ideology. But for just to talk about different
sides, meaning different things. For example, when it comes
to economics, perhaps someone on the left when they
use the word freedom or they, they would bring
the word freedom to the table when saying, OK,
so uh perhaps workers should be paid enough, should
earn enough to cover at least their basic expenses
and to feel secure enough in their own lives.
I mean, if they work example, full time, they
should earn enough to cover their bills and, and
not being ejected from their homes and stuff like
that. And perhaps they might use the word freedom
there in the sense of not being economically coerced,
for example. But when it comes to the right,
perhaps they would use the word freedom to refer
more to things like in the case of more
libertarian right wingers, uh they want a more deregulated
market and that's freedom for them. So I mean
that that's also you're making in the sense that
OK, so people use these words, they refer to
principles, but even then they uh they use it
very sometimes very loosely because in a particular situation,
freedom means one thing, in another situation, it means
another thing. And even the supposed meaning that in
this particular case, freedom might have for the leftists
and right wingers. If you look across different examples,
perhaps they are not. So much on the side
of their own uh flavor of freedom, but they
are more authoritarian and so on. So does this
also make sense?
Yeah, that makes a lot of sense to me.
I think it's a great example of, of the
point I'm making, which is that it, it, it
doesn't really make sense to say that one ideology
is the ideology of freedom, given that each uh
political coalition is trying to use freedom to mobilize
support for its side. That is freedom is uh
a word that has a lot of positive vibes.
Uh If you, if you ask people, if they
like freedom, I bet you that most people will
say, yeah, freedom is great. And so each party
is basically competing to capture the positive vibes of
freedom to mobilize support for their side. Uh But
whether each side actually consistently holds the principle of
freedom is a different question. And I think the
answer to that question is no, they don't. Um
WHAT they're trying to do is use freedom as
a kind of mission statement to uh um associate
their political coalition with positive vibes. Um But I
don't think it represents a coherent and principled philosophy
because if it were, you would see each side,
you know, uh valuing freedom in all cases. But
that is uh but that is not what you
see. Um Another example of this kind of competition
for, for positive and negative vibes I think is
really clear in the abortion debate. Um YOU see,
uh you know, people who oppose abortion, they, they
describe themselves as pro life that is, they're trying
to paint themselves as the group that values life,
right? They're trying to put a positive spin on
their view. Uh And, and in the same way,
uh people on the, on the pro choice side
uh are trying to claim the mantle of freedom
that a woman should have the right to do
what she wants with her own body. But of
course, neither side holds this actual, this principle actually,
consistently, people who are pro life are happy to
be pro death when it comes to civilian casualties,
when it comes to military occupations, when it comes
to the death penalty, uh when it comes to
contraception, which could uh actually prevent abortions, um uh
on the left, uh uh uh most liberals will
say that a woman should have the right to
do what she wants with her own body unless
she wants to um say uh purchase private health
insurance or not wear a seatbelt or drink a
large sugary soda or have sex for money. Uh
These are all views that are pretty common on
the left and they are pretty inconsistent with the
idea that we should generally have the right to
do what we want with our own bodies. Um
So, uh that would be, that would be my,
my case there.
Yeah. And I brought that to the table, I
mean, people basically using the same term or referring
to the same principle, but with different meanings because
sometimes in political debates, political discussions, it's very obvious,
at least for someone looking on the outs from
the outside that uh people are using the same
term. But with completely different meanings, like in this
case, freedom and the examples I and you gave
here. So um uh uh but perhaps what I
was alluding to there by bringing that discussion here
to the table is that, is it really about
the word or the principle of freedom or since
you're uh using it to refer to completely different
things? Isn't it really about you having a particular
kind of interest of you wanting to do some
something or wanting other people to do something as
well uh or not do for uh in particular
cases and then simply attaching the label freedom to
it just because it sounds good to try to
convince other people, for example.
Yeah, I think it's very much the latter and
I think it's, it's directly analogous to the marketing
and pr you see in the corporate world, you
know, corporations will have mission statements, they have values
that they are supposedly pursuing. Uh And, and because
it is in their financial interest to associate positive
vibes with their brand, right? You know, Starbucks says
their mission is to inspire and nurture the human
spirit. Um I'm sure you could come up with,
with, uh, uh equally silly examples from, from other,
uh, large corporations. Um, AND I think there is
an interesting element there, which is that in order
to sell, in order to make money, you have
to convince people that you're not interested in making
money. Uh, AND I think that's what I would
call a social. But I think you, you see
the exact same phenomenon in the political world in
order to gain uh power, you have to convince
people that you're not interested in gaining power, that
instead what you're interested in is making the world
a better place. Generally making things better for everyone
being uh kind and generous and fair and, and
patriotic and virtuous and all those sunny things. But
really, uh um politics is a competition to gain
control of the coercive apparatus of the state which
uh literally forces people to do things by threat
of imprisonment. Uh And uh that is a scary
thing and nobody has ever gained power by saying
that that's what they want. You know, I, I
want to gain control of the, the coercive apparatus
of the state so that I can boss people
around and force them to do things by threat
of imprisonment. No one has ever gotten elected by
saying that just as no business has ever made
money by saying all I want to do is
make as much money as possible. I don't care
about values or the environment or, or whatever. Um
So I think we have these, these um social
paradoxes, these tensions in our mind that in order
to pursue, pursue our goals, we cannot admit the
goals we're pursuing. Uh And I think we can't
even admit them to ourselves. A lot of the
time. I think a lot of people at Starbucks
would probably believe their own bullshit that they really
are trying to inspire and nurture the human spirit.
And I think uh most committed partisans and ideologues
also believe their own bullshit that they really are
trying to uh pursue this impartially altruistic vision to
uh uh better humanity in the world.
Uh But when it comes to the social dynamics
uh themselves. So for example, things like social identity
and intergroup relations, what aspects of that kind of
research would apply here because I mean, I I
read in your paper that you are also trying
to reframe, for example, the in group out group
dichotomy as an allies versus rivals, dichotomy, right? Could,
could you explain that?
Sure. So there's a whole bunch of research on
what's called social identity theory, the idea that we
have an in group and we have an out
group and it's a monolithic in group and against
a monolithic out group and they, they stay, they're
fixed and they stay the same and we we,
you know, do things and believe things to make
us feel better about our in group to enhance
our self esteem. And uh we, we do things
that make the out group look worse to enhance
our self esteem. That is, that is the uh
vision coming out of decades of research in social
psychology. I think that vision is, is deeply flawed
for a number of reasons. Uh uh FOR one
thing, um If you actually look at the uh
group dynamics and um uh small scale hunter gatherer
for societies, uh It is nothing like the monolithic
in group against the monolithic out group. It is
very much uh complex strategic Aries occurring within groups.
Uh They're constantly fission and fusion. Uh They're called
fission fusion societies, literally like they, they have small
bands of around 20 or 30 people and then
they, they form larger groups and then they split
apart. And so it's much more complicated and dynamic
than the picture of a, of one tribe on
one side of the river and another tribe on
the other side of the river. I think we
are much more politically savvy and sophisticated than this
kind of caveman tribalism that is that has come
out of uh social identity theory. Um And so
what I try to replace this, this picture with
is instead of talking about in groups and out
groups, which is misleading in, in, in a variety
of ways. I think it's, it's more illuminating to
talk about alliances, to talk about allies and rivals.
Uh AND uh and conflicts within groups uh So,
uh I can walk you through some of the,
the ways in which this in group out group
thing breaks down. So, uh you know, uh you
might expect uh that uh uh in order to
favor a group, you would have to be in
that group, they would have to be in your,
in group. And in order to um oppose a
group, they would have to be uh your out
group. But that's just manifestly not the case. Uh
You don't have to be a black person to
feel as if you are an ally of black
people and you don't have to be a police
officer to feel as if you are an ally
of police officers. You don't have to be an
Israeli to feel pro Israel. You don't have to
be a Palestinian to be pro Palestinian. You do
not have to be in a group to be
an ally of that group. Alliances can occur between
groups and the same thing occurs within groups. You
don't have to, you, you can be a white
person and uh feel enmity toward white people. In
fact, a lot of white progressives uh feel that
way about white people. Um You can be an
American and feel negatively toward Americans. Did a lot
of progressives hold that view uh as well. Uh
You can be a poor person and feel antipathy
toward poor people. You can be a rich person,
feel antipathy toward rich people. And these phenomena are
much easier to understand when you realize that there
are rivalries within groups that is within the group
of rich people. There are different subcultures uh within
the group of poor people. There are different subcultures,
perhaps ethnic rivalries between lower class white people and
lower class ethnic minorities, um uh et cetera, et
cetera. So I think um if we, if we
view politics from the lens of ever shifting alliances
and rivalries, uh I think that is going to
be much more illuminating and insightful way of understanding
things than in terms of cheering for some monolithic
in group against some monolithic out group that never
changes.
And when it comes to the alliances, how do
people form them? I mean, are there uh is
there a set of criteria that people use to
choose their allies?
Yeah. So in the paper, I go over three
criteria that people use for choosing allies that have
a lot of uh empirical evidence going for them
at the moment. I'm not saying that these are
the only three criteria we use, but I think
uh the strongest case could be made that that
these are important. So the three are uh similarity,
transitivity and interdependence. So I'll go through each one
in turn, uh similarity uh like attracts like we
like people who are similar to us. Uh PEOPLE
who speak the same language who uh speak that
language in the same dialect who inhabit the same
location uh who um share uh personality quirks, maybe
share similar beliefs, um uh share the same skin
color, et cetera, et cetera. This is a pretty
obvious one. And the, and the evolutionary rationale there
is pretty clear. Um So for one thing, uh
similarity uh might help you coordinate and collaborate with
an ally. That is uh the, the easiest example
of this is if allies speak the same language,
they're gonna have an easier time working together. But
um they could also speak the same language of
their subculture and have an easier time working together
or they could have, you know, similar personality quirks
and they might, you know, uh uh be less
likely to have conflicts and disagreements with one another
because of, because they're more similar in, in that
vein. Um A marker might help to uh create
common knowledge of the alliance itself that as you
see this in sports, you know, one team wears
one wears a red shirts, the other team wears
blue shirts and that helps everyone coordinate, uh who's
on whose side. Uh We do the same thing
with uh with our alliances and rivalries. And I
think one of the reasons why racism is so
pernicious is because there are visible uh differences that
are common knowledge to everyone uh in terms of
skin color and outward appearance. Um And that helps
uh make it easier for people to coordinate uh
who's on whose side the second one is transitivity.
Uh So that is summed up by the following
statements, the enemy of my enemy is my friend.
Uh The friend of my friend is my friend,
the friend of my enemy is my enemy and
the enemy of my friend is my enemy. Uh
These statements taken together are what I call transitivity,
the sharing of allies and enemies. And there are
pretty solid functional reasons why we would want transitive
allies versus intransitive allies. That as it mitigates two
major costs, one is infighting that is we don't
want our allies getting into conflicts with one another
because if they get into conflicts, then we're going
to have to be forced to choose sides. We
have to be forced to choose between them. And
that means we're going to lose one of our
allies and potentially gain a new enemy, which is
really bad for us. So we want our allies
to get along. Uh But, and we also want
our allies to share our enemies because um if,
if an ally uh is friendly toward our enemies,
well, they might, they might side with our enemies
and betray us. Uh And that is really bad
for us as well. So for that reason, we
really uh we look to, to transitivity when, when
deciding who we want to ally with and who
we don't. Uh AND we also uh try to
accommodate new allies by um by being transitive with
them that is if, if we form an alliance,
we oppose our allies, enemies. Uh AND we support
our allies, friends, that's transitivity, uh inter interdependence. This
is probably the broadest and most unexplored one. But
I think um it's, it's, it's perhaps one of
the most important ones. This is just generally whether
uh a person or individual benefits you or not,
whether they are acting in your self interest or
not. Um You could think of this uh in
terms of someone acting against your self interest, say
if you're competing with someone for status or resources,
um then you would be negatively interdependent with them
and you would not want to form an alliance
with them because it is in your interests to
lower their status or to lower their access to
resources. So you can get more of those resources
for yourself. So it would be a kind of
negative interdependence, a positive interdependence would be these people
are inclined to help you to share information with
you, to trade with you, um et cetera, et
cetera. Um So interdependence are just, you know, a,
a cooper relationship wherein uh uh parties benefit each
other either directly or indirectly that is likely to
lead to alliances. So those are the three criteria
I discussed in the paper.
And of course, when we have alliances, we need,
I mean to maintain them, of course, we need
to support our allies. And so in, in the
particular context of politics, or at least that's one
of the contexts where you see this happening, how
do we do that through the use of pro
propagandistic uh tactics?
So the point of an alliance, from my perspective
is to uh uh offer support in conflicts that
is conflicts is ubiquitous in social life. There are
limited resources like status, power and resources and one
side's or, or one person's gain is is another
side or person's loss. So uh in order to
prevail in these conflicts, we try to uh mobilize
supporters, we try to draw people to our side
so that our side is bigger than the other
side and the other side submits to our bigger
side. That's the way democracy works the side with
the most votes wins. That's how a lot of
conflicts uh play out in small scale societies, the
bigger side gets their way. Um And so we
have a, a vested interest in making our side
the bigger side. How do we do that? Uh
The way we do that is with propaganda. Um
So when a conflict breaks out, we try to
frame the conflict and describe it in ways that
uh um flatter our allies and impugn our rivals.
Um So I can walk you through the three
propagandistic biases I discussed in the paper if you'd
like. Yeah, sure. So the first one is uh
perpetrator biases. So uh probably the most common source
of conflict would be someone committing harm against someone
else. Um And uh how do you uh mobilize
support for a perpetrator of a transgression against the
person? They rocked. Well, one way you want to
do that is you want to downplay that transgression.
You want to minimize it, you want to justify
it, you want to rationalize it. You want to
emphasize the mitigating circumstances, you want to emphasize their
good intentions, they didn't really mean to do anything
wrong. Um You want to uh frame them as
generally a good well meaning person and the the
victim as as being AAA crybaby or even making
it up altogether. So that's what I would call
perpetrator biases. Um They are extremely common uh both
when we commit transgressions and when our allies commit
transgressions, we uh bring perpetrator biases to bear on
that. The other side of this, of course, is
victim biases. Victims have basically the opposite set of
biases. So they uh will view the perpetrator as
uh uh incredibly personally responsible for, for committing the
harm, no mitigating circumstances, no good intentions. They were
just pure evil twirling their mustaches and, and they
just wanted to harm us just out of pure
sadism. Uh And uh of, of course, the harm
they committed was incredibly grievous. It will last for
generations. We can, we should never forget it. We
should always remember this horrible harm that has, that
will, that will last forever. Um Those, those are
um victim biases. Um You could think of it
as the exact opposite of perpetrator biases. Um And
then there's another class of interesting biases that relate
to conflicts over status and resources. Uh This presumably
would also be a recurrent source of conflict in
ancestral environments. And the way we resolve these conflicts
is by making attributions about the causes of disadvantages
and advantages. Um That is uh if we attribute
a person's advantages to their internal dispositions, that is
their intelligence, their talent, uh their wisdom, their, their,
their creativity, um their work ethic, then uh we're
inclined to side with that person and let them
have their advantages or their resources. Um But if
a person uh uh lost a lot of resources
or status through no fault of their own, through
misfortune through bad luck, um or through uh mistreatment
or exploitation by others. Uh Then we're inclined to
side with them and we're inclined to um uh
give resources to them and, and compensate them and
help them in, in whatever way we can. Um
So naturally, if there's a conflict over resources or
status, then we're going to uh want to attribute
our high status allies uh advantages to their internal
dispositions, they're smart and, and hard working and our
low status allies, disadvantages to external factors. They were
just unlucky or they were preyed upon by exploitative
people. Uh And so we, we have both of
these biases and we employ them depending on whether
our allies are in the advantaged position or the
disadvantaged position. And we do that in a strategic
way, those are attribution biases.
And so how do we go from the biases
you've just described there? And also uh what we
talked about a bit earlier regarding social dynamics and
alliances. How do we go from there to political
alliance structures, like for example, let's say a political
party.
Yeah. So um it just kind of falls naturally
out of those, those basic assumptions about how our
psychology works. So if you just think about, you
know, similarity, transitivity, interdependence and just look at the,
the kind of social groups that form in any
given society, you can start to see how this
might unfold. So for example, you might get some
uh some groups forming based on ethnicity uh or
uh region, you know, southerners might have a kind
of Southern loyalty or class uh or uh or
religion. Um And from there, you, you start to
think about, well, how are these groups going to
coalesce into different alliances? And then you might start
thinking about transitivity and then you might start thinking
about overlap between groups. So maybe, you know, ethnic
minorities are going to overlap with poor people. And
so you might get an alliance between the interests
of ethnic minorities and the interests of lower class
people. Um And you might see uh some, some
status rivalries between, you know, members of the upper
class. That is the more highly educated uh elites
and the less educated, wealthy corporate executives. And you
might see a rivalry there with perhaps uh intellectual
elites siding with um ethnic minorities and poor people
and with the wealthy business people siding with uh
lower class white people who might feel rival risk
with their lower class, ethnic minority counterparts. Uh And
uh that's, that's basically the, the dynamics of how
it plays out. Um And then from there, once
you, you get this alliance structure, um it, you
just straightforwardly apply those propagandistic biases to each member
of the alliance structure. And then from there, do
the contents of political belief systems just fall out
uh perfectly. Uh And you, and you can get
a beautiful explanation for all of the inconsistencies and
double standards and idiosyncrasies of political belief system simply
by looking at the alliance structure and looking at
what beliefs would mobilize support for each member of
that alliance structure and from their ideologies uh fall
out of that elegantly.
But since from the very beginning of our conversation,
we've also been referring to alternative theories. Uh In
this case, in the paper, you also go through,
for example, intolerance theory of authoritarianism theory and egalitarianism
theory. So could you tell us about those? I
mean, how uh in what ways they would be
alternatives to your alliance theory of political belief systems?
And I in what aspects do you think they
failed?
Sure. Um So one alternative explanation for the existing
alliance structure that is, is that it's all based
on equality. And really what you see in the
left wing alliance is just a bunch of low
status disadvantaged groups. And what you see in the
right wing alliance is just a bunch of high
status disadvantaged groups. But if you actually look at
the alliance structure, you see that that is not
the case. So there are plenty of high status
groups uh on the left wing side, like college
professors, scientists, uh government regulators, um members of the
uh of, of international organizations, um scientists, et cetera.
Uh And then you also see plenty of low
status groups on the right wing side. So you
see, uh you know, working class white people, um
you know, uh manufacturing workers, um people without a
college degree, people in uh uh small towns that
are struggling. Um And uh what's interesting is that
if you actually measure groups, perceived status and you
measure their perceived political allegiances, turns out that status
makes no difference uh in in predicting which group,
either side of the political spectrum will like will
like or dislike. So this, I'm referring here to
the work of mark brand. Uh And he measured
attitudes toward a variety of different groups, dozens of,
of different social groups in society measured their status,
measured their perceived political allegiances. Turns out the simplest
and most elegant and powerful model just uses the
group's perceived political allegiances, throws out status throws out
other variables that basically predicts who you're going to
like, uh, and, and dislike. Um, AND, and, and
if you just think about other groups, you know,
like there are plenty of groups in the political
line structure that don't really seem high status or
low status at all. Like our environmentalists, high status.
I, I don't know, uh, are, are Christian fundamentalist,
high status or low status? I don't know. Uh
WHAT about Southerners, high status or low status? Not
sure. Um PRO-LIFE people, unclear, recreational drug users, unclear.
Uh Really, I think status is either ambiguous or
it violates the rules. So I don't think that
equality can really explain uh contemporary alliance structures and
it certainly can't explain uh the variation in allied
structures you see around the world and throughout history.
So the alliance structures were very different in the
past. Uh uh uh African Americans used to be
quite loyal to the party of Lincoln uh racist,
segregationist Southerners used to be quite loyal to the
Democrats Party. They were known as Dixiecrats. Uh uh
uh uh DEVOUT Christianity used to, to not be
a partisan issue at all. Uh So if you,
if you look at these line structures, there's so
much variation across time and space that it's really
hard to argue that any principle of equality uh
is organizing them. And then of course, there are
plenty of ideological inconsistencies regarding equality which I discuss
in the paper and which I, I talked about
previously. Um THE other ones, authority and diversity. Um
Yeah, I basically use the same strategy with those.
I, I go through uh plenty of ideological uh
inconsistencies where these principles are not uh held. Uh
AND, and are often flouted uh strategically. Um And
yeah, that's, that's basically my, my beef with uh
egalitarianism, authoritarianism and tolerance.
So, since you're from the US, do you think
that if your theory is correct, it might help
us understand or better understand the formation of the
Democratic Republican divide? Whether,
yeah, so I, I presented a pretty detailed sketch
of, of how I think this divide originated. Uh
And uh where, where it was, you know, around
100 150 years ago and how it has evolved
over time. So, as I mentioned, uh previously, uh
the current political instructor is very different than what
it was. Um YOU know, 100 150 years ago
at the turn of the 20th century. Um Yeah,
you know, uh Christianity and, and, and abortion was
just not an issue. It was not a divide.
Feminism was, was not a divide between the two
parties. Um uh AT the turn of the 20th
century, um race was very different. So, uh African
Americans were actually leaned in favor of the Republican
Party, uh uh racist southerners were, were Democrats. Um
So, uh I walk through the evolution of that
alliance structure and how it has changed in the
paper. Uh And I think uh you could tell
a similar story for how alliance structures have played
out in other societies. I think you see some
overlaps in, in similar countries like uh countries in
Western Europe. Uh And I think that could be
explained by just uh convergences and the types of,
of factors that create alliance structures. So if you
have, you know, overlap between um highly religious pos,
you know, whatever the cause of that overlap, if
there's overlap, then groups are gonna be more likely
to form an alliance and, and belong to the
same political coalition than other groups. And I think
you see that convergence in a lot of Western
European nations, particularly nations who have, who have um
had similar uh political conflicts um about globalization and
the erosion of religious morality. Um And it also
explains some of the differences. I think if you
look at the unique history of different uh countries,
particularly Eastern European countries who, who uh who are
dealing with the collapse of communism uh that has
resulted in different alliances. You even there's an interesting
example, I cite in the paper in Latvia where
uh um uh green parties were actually sort of
uh anti-communist, right wing nationalist uh parties uh because
they were, they rose in opposition to Soviet industrial
policy. Um So there are lots of, there are
lots of interesting examples of alliance structures that, that
deviate from what you see, in America and a
few uh western nations. Um And I talk about
that a lot in the paper and how other
theories really struggle to explain it.
Uh And so, uh I would also like to
ask you about, uh I would, I would like
to hear your thoughts about uh moral foundations theory.
That's also something that we touched on earlier a
little bit. So, um what are your thoughts on
it? And on basically the idea bit uh about
there being a connection or an intimate connection between
uh certain moral values and also certain correspond or
supposedly corresponding political ideologies. And uh a second question
I have that's related to that is uh do
you think that um the way you're thinking about
or reframing the way we think about political belief
system, uh ethical systems or not?
Yeah. Um So, uh first, I'll just start off
by saying that I'm, I'm very skeptical of, of
moral foundations theory as a theory of political differences.
So I don't think it can explain why liberals
and conservatives have the beliefs. They do. I don't
think it can even come close to explaining all
of the inconsistencies in political ideologies. In fact, it
struggles to make sense of them. Um As I
argue in the paper. So I think in terms
of a theory of political belief systems, moral foundations
theory fails um as a theory of moral cognition,
uh I think it's fine as a first pass,
I think there, you know, the, the six foundations
that he sketched are reasonable hypotheses about um cognitive
adaptations that might have evolved to solve recurrent problems
and cooper operation and, and group living. Um I
personally prefer uh Oliver Curry's work which sort of
expands upon uh Jonathan he's work uh and adds
a few additional uh foundations and gets a little
bit more systematic about the, the game theory uh
uh uh of, of these adaptive problems. Um So
as a theory of morality, I, I have no
objections to moral foundations theory. Um So the question
was whether um this sort of cynical view of
political ideologies applies to moral systems as well. Um
And maybe, maybe not. Um So in the paper,
I sort of take great pains to distinguish between
politics and morality because I think they're too often
conflated uh in a way that causes a lot
of confusion. And the reason they're conflated is because
politics uh almost always masquerades as morality in order
to, in order to achieve its political objectives, that
is in order to rally people to our side,
we have to convince people that our side is
the good side, the moral side, the virtuous side,
and the other side is evil, unfair, uh disrespectful,
et cetera. So morality is our chief weapon in
our political arsenal. And that is why it is
often so easy to confuse morality with politics as
if they were the same thing that is to
confuse moralism with, with morality. Um And uh in
the paper, I, I try to differentiate politics and
morality in the following way. I describe politics as
being centrally about conflict and loyalty to one or
the other side of that conflict. That's what I
think politics is ultimately about uh uh and morality
is ultimately about cooper operation that is working together
for a mutual benefit uh and impartiality to uh
either side of a conflict and working to resolve
conflicts. So, uh in that sense, when once you
cleave uh politics from morality, morality starts to look
pretty nice. Um So in that sense, I don't
think that um uh morality as distinguished from, from
politics, uh it can be described in the same
sort of cynical terms as being about, you know,
self interested. Um uh FLOUTING of moral principles. I
think we do have genuine moral principles that are
shared between liberals and conservatives. I think the prevailing
view that ideologies are about moral disagreement is actually
backwards. I think um at the heart of our
political disputes is, is moral agreement that is we
are using the same moral moral language, the same
moral intuitions to try to win political conflicts. Uh
We're trying to cast our side as the fair
side, as the side for freedom, the side for
patriotism. Um THE side for compassion. Uh And, and
we couldn't have those political fights if both sides
didn't care about compassion, uh freedom, fairness, et cetera.
So I think we have common moral intuitions that
partisans compete to activate and that underlies a lot
of our political discourse.
And so again, if your theory is correct, um
would it have some implications as to how we
look at uh correlations between individual differences and political
beliefs? Like, for example, a certain differences in personality
traits and particular political beliefs.
Sure. Yeah. So a lot of people think that
personality traits are the explanation for our political belief
systems. I think that's wrong, but that doesn't mean
that they don't matter and they don't exist clearly.
There is some evidence that there are some personality
differences between liberals and conservatives. There are some psychological
differences between liberal conservatives. The question is, what role
do they play? Uh, IN my view, uh, they
play a secondary role to alliances. Um, AND, uh,
there are two ways that, that, that personality. Uh,
SO, uh, the first way is that, um, your
psychological traits might predispose you to join certain alliances
over others that is, you might be inclined to
side with people who are like you or who
act in the interests of people who are like
you. Um, SO that's, that's one possible mechanism. So,
for example, um, if I am sexually restricted, uh,
and, uh, uptight about sexual promiscuity, I might be
more inclined to become religious. Um, AND if I'm
more sexually promiscuous, I might be more, I might
be less inclined to become religious. I might abandon
my, my religious upbringing. Um And uh and of
course, so, so there will be a causal pathway
between your sexual strategy, your religiosity and your ideology.
But ultimately, the religiosity is what's um predicting the,
the ideology, not the, the uh sexual strategy directly.
Uh II, I think, uh or, or, or, you
know, the sexual strategy, predicting loyalty to fellow uh
sexually restricted people and, and wanting to advance their
group interests. So that's one way, the other way
is that the group you belong to or ally
with, uh shapes your personality or your psychological traits.
There are plenty of ways you can see that
if you belong to a religious community, they're going
to pressure you to behave in ways that are
that um uh that mark you as a member
of that religious community and distinguish you from other
communities, they're gonna want you to uh uh profess
your devotion to the religions, creeds to um to
purge all doubts and uncertainties from your mind uh
to become more sexually restricted if you. Uh So
it might work the other way as well. Um
So there are really two possible ways. So your,
your personality might uh cause you to join certain
alliances over others or your, your alliance might shape
your personality. Uh And I think both of those
uh uh mechanisms are compatible with alliance theory and
compatible with the idea that alliances are ultimately the
direct primary cause of our political beliefs.
Uh And so your paper is all about, uh
sort of new approach in political psychology, what you
call there a shift from deep seated moral values
to ever shifting alliances and rivalries. So before we
move on from this topic to another one, I
would like to ask you. So do you think
that I if you're correct? And if basically we
told people about this, that when people get frustrated
because for example, from someone from their own political
group, political party, for example, they find out that
they have uh also um alliances to some extent
with people from other political ideologies and they get
very frustrated because, and they call them, for example,
hypocrites or traitors or turn cloaks or something like
that. Do you think that it could help people
perhaps be a little bit more understanding of where
that behavior comes from? And perhaps also the fact
that they probably also do that themselves and I
mean, perhaps be a little less divisive in their
political approaches or is that too optimistic?
Um I, I'm torn on that. II, I definitely
think knowledge is a good thing and, and, and
knowledge of the truth might help us solve our
problems and in particular our political problems. Um YOU
know, sometimes studying this makes me depressed and, and
cynical and pessimistic. Uh Sometimes I see a bit
of a silver lining. I think one silver lining,
you might see is that, uh, this shows us
that we're really not as different as we think
we are that we don't have these deep seated,
uh, world views that are, that are, that are
completely clashing and at odds with one another, we
don't have fundamentally different moral principles. We basically have
the same moral principles. We all care about fairness.
Um, WE all care about, you know, uh, helping
people who are truly in need. Uh We all
care about, you know, welcoming people into our group
when they pose no threat and when they're willing
to uh be an, you know, an asset to
our group, um and the differences really come from
our beliefs about those things about, you know, what,
what is unfair, what is fair, uh Whether the
people we want to welcome really are a threat
or, or not. Um WHETHER uh the people we
want to help really are in need. Those are
really what, what political differences are about. They're not
uh an absence or a presence of compassion or
an absence or presence of uh uh you know,
a willingness to, to welcome people to the group
or, or um an absence or presence of uh
concerns for fairness. Um So I think uh at
the heart of our political disputes is, is a
shared moral psychology. Uh And I think that should
challenge the idea that one side is inherently morally
superior to the other side, at least in terms
of their underlying character, maybe their beliefs make them
do things in the world that are bad but
in terms of their underlying character, their moral psychology,
their intuitions, the way they interact with their family
and their friends. Uh, MOST people are pretty decent
people. Uh, AND, yeah, sometimes they can have beliefs
that, that make them do terrible things but I
think it's worth remembering that, that, um, we're not
as different as, as we think we are.
Yeah. I, I was also perhaps thinking about the
fact that, uh, if people understand that, uh, people's
political beliefs and their own political beliefs are not
so as coherent or consistent as they think, uh,
that perhaps when they, for example, see someone that,
uh, identifies with their own political poll, political party
or something like that, uh, espousing, uh, political beliefs
that they don't necessarily agree with. That's not really
the end of the world or a tragedy. It's
just that, uh, I mean, no one is fully
consistent and no one follows, uh, I don't know
the, a particular kind of political dogma to, uh,
uh, to the last detail. So I don't know
if,
yeah. No, that's, that's, that's a good point. Yeah.
No, that, that makes sense. So, I, I guess
the idea is that you might be less, uh,
pissed off by your, by the traitors on your
side. Um, ONCE you realize that your side is
just a cobbled together patchwork of inconsistent beliefs. If,
if you think that your side has a coherent
principled moral philosophy and you see someone deviating from
that, well, then you might think that they're evil
or insane or stupid. Right. But if you see
your side as not having a coherent or principled
philosophy, then you might be a little bit softer
on people who might deviate from it because if
they're deviating from it, maybe they're deviating from it
in a good way. Um Yeah, that's one hopeful
way of looking at it. Uh I'm not optimistic
about political extremists being softened by these ideas, but
I think it might affect uh people who are
a bit more moderate uh at the margins
and so changing topics. Now, uh in your substack,
you also, you have a collection of very interesting
uh articles there and one of them has to
do with the meaning of life. So, does it
really matter? I mean, does it matter if life
has some meaning or not? At least to most
people?
Yeah, it's an interesting question. Uh I think it's
worth distinguishing between two different kinds of meaning. Um
So the meaning I'm, I'm talking about in, in
the post is very much a highfalutin intellectual kind
of, of meaning. Um TRYING to come up with
a philosophy of, of, of life that is coherent.
Um And uh but, but there's a different kind
of meaning um that you might call emotional meaning.
Um THE feeling that what you're doing uh is
meaningful. And I think that is very much not
and has an emotional sense of meaning. And even
just raising a family is a, is a meaningful
activity. Anyone who has a family will, will tell
you that, you know, trying to raise their kid
and have a good relationship with their kid is
a, is a meaningful project to undertake. And uh
how, how I think about the, the emotional aspect
of meaning is basically, it's evolution's way of telling
you that this activity is in your long term
fitness interests. It might not pay off right now.
It might not pay off immediately. It may not
pay off at all, but probabilistically and in the
long run, it's good to invest in this activity.
So, you know, uh if you think about uh
your biological fitness, it's very straightforward in the case
of raising a family. Um, IT takes a really
long time to rear a child to maturity and
to make sure that they're successful and well off
and high status and gonna give you lots of
grandkids. Um, THAT'S a, that's a very difficult and
long run project that will, that will have lots
of setbacks and obstacles and discomforts and pains and
conflicts, right? Uh Any, any parent will tell you
that their, that their kid can be a pain
in the ass and, and, and you know, it's
not all sunshine and rainbows. So we need some
kind of emotional mechanism to help us weather those
storms. Uh AND, and see the grand prize on
the horizon, which is, you know, uh uh rearing
a, a mature and successful uh uh family that
will give you lots of grandkids. So that, so
the emotional sense of meaning is something that evolution
has given us to get us to devote to
a long term fitness, beneficial projects. So raising a
family is the most obvious example. But there are
other examples, I think committing to a group, an
alliance and bolstering that alliance, uh making sure you
know that, that, that everyone is committed to the
alliance and purging dissenters and purging uh uh traitors
from the alliance and making sure that they gain
power and superiority and dominance over rival alliances. That
is also a long term project that is often
beset with many setbacks and obstacles. And I think
many people gain a lot of meaning from their,
from their political uh uh allegiances. Um And that
can be uh either a good thing or a
bad thing depending on how you, you want to
look at it. Um Cultivating a valuable skill is
also a long term thing uh that, that will
pay off in terms of raising your status. But,
but maybe beset with, with obstacles, helping others, you
know, putting others in your debt that might pay
off in the long run. If you're ever in
need, then you'll have a lot of people who
feel grateful for you and are willing to help
you uh in that situation. Uh But in order
to be helped in that situation, you, you must
have provided a lot of help to, to others
before that. And so that's why helping others uh
feels meaningful. So that's emotional meaning. Sorry, I went
on a very long tangent there.
That's
um yeah. Uh So I didn't talk about this
in the piece. I probably should have. Maybe this
is a separate piece that's emotional meaning. I don't
think that is unique to intellectuals. I think we
all have emotional meaning. I think that's a biological
adaptation. Then there's intellectual meaning that is uh what
we think is objectively meaningful. That is what we
think is rationally defensible as, as meaningful. Um What
we think the uh coherent and principled uh answer
is to, to the meaning of life. What are,
what are actual reasons are for, for living and
caring for families and supporting our, our political tribe
uh that uh is very much unique to intellectuals.
At least in my personal experience I could be
wrong. You know, I'm, I'm happy to see some
data challenging me, but it seems like if you
poll the general population and you ask them, you
know, how much they think about existentialism or nihilism
or Camu or Sarre or how much they, they
try to, how much they care about having a
coherent uh uh worldview or philosophy. I would bet
you that you would see uh uh highly educated
people uh answering yes to those questions at a
much higher frequency. Uh And so, in that sense,
I don't think most people care about the meaning
of life. Um IN, in that intellectual sense,
you know, whenever I think about the uh intellectual
kind of meaning of life, you were just referring
to there every time it comes to my mind
that uh Socratic uh uh, that, that quote from
Socrates where he says something along the lines, the
unexamined life is not worth living. That like, really
is that, is, that, is, is really life just
about, I don't know, overthinking.
Yeah. I, I find it really surprising that intellectual
sort of hold that quote in reverence to me
that's kind of, I find it really kind of
disgusting quote to be perfectly honest. I find it
elitist, uh, and, and, and smugly superior. It's an
implicit dig at people who don't spend their whole
life philosophizing. It's basically saying that those people, their
lives aren't worth living. That's a terrible sentiment. Absolutely
despicable when you, when you really think about it.
So, it, it, it continuously surprises me that intellectuals
hold up this quote as a, you know, as
this symbol of, of meaning and virtue. I think
it's just, um, smug elitism, uh, masquerading as, as,
uh, as philosophy.
Yeah. But, uh, I, I mean, going on with
the cynicism here, I guess so when it comes
to the meaning of life and other sorts of,
for example, existential questions that uh highly intellectual, over
educated people uh care about. I mean, do you
have any idea if they really do care about
them for the sake of acquiring some sort of
knowledge about particular kinds of questions, or do you
think that they like to discuss them among themselves,
mostly for the sake of social signaling, showing off
their intellect and stuff like
that? Yeah. So uh I, I would argue that
that the answer is, is very much the latter.
Um I, I don't mean to upset anyone, but
I do think this is the, the best explanation
uh for, for what's going on here, which isn't
to say that, you know, I look down upon
this, I engage in it myself. I love philosophizing
about the meaning of life. I, I, me
too. I have almost 300 philosophy interviews on the
show.
So, yeah. So just because I'm describing this as
kind of social signaling um and, and bullshit doesn't
mean that it's, it's bad or I don't like
it. I actually love it that I'm kind of
attacking myself here. Um But I do think it's
a kind of BS um I don't think that
um the human mind has an innate or, or
deep seated desire for truth about abstract, irrelevant uh
matters. I think we certainly have evolved a desire
for truth and concrete, practical relevant situations. That is
we want to know if there really is a
tiger over there. We want to know if this
canoe really has a hole in it or not.
We really want to know if our tool works
or if this food is safe to eat. Those
are the kinds of things that we evolved to
care about and, and, and evolved to care about
having accurate beliefs about. But when it comes to
the meaning of life, how on earth would that
affect your fitness in any way? Why would we
care about having a correct view of that? That
strikes me as a very evolutionarily implausible desire. So
I think if we're going to explain discourse on
the meaning of life, we cannot appeal to any
deep seated motive for truth seeking and in these,
in these matters, I think we have to look
in other directions. I think we have to look
to the social aspect of these debates because after
all debates are social, they are not just, you
know, one individual thinking to himself or herself. Uh
If that's what uh you know, pondering the meaning
of life was like, uh it would be unrecognizable
to us. No, this, these, these discussions are very
social. Uh THEY have all sorts of, of social
implications, all sorts of status implications. Um We tend
to praise people who have, you know, well thought
out uplifting um philosophies of life as, as humane,
as, as wise, as virtuous and we really seek
that kind of acclaim and, and esteem from our
peers. I think philosophers love that kind of acclaim.
They love to be called wise and humane and,
and insightful. Um So I think the key here
is, is thinking about, you know, what an intellectual
is, what is an over educated person, what trait
makes them that way. And I think the clearest
answer is that they are hyper reasoners, their reasoning
faculty is uh uh very online uh and intensely
activated uh all the time. That's what I think
in, in like there are people who love to
reason and we all have reasoning faculties. Some of
us have, you know, you know, stronger reasoning faculties
and we like to reason more frequently than others,
but we all have it. Uh And uh and
I think to understand why intellectuals debate the meaning
of life, we have to understand what reasoning is
and what it's all about and why reasoning evolved.
Um And the theory I like most about what
reasoning is uh comes from Hugo Mercier, who I
believe you've had on the podcast before. And he
thinks that reasoning evolved for two purposes, one is
arguing and the other is rationalizing. So we reason
to win debates uh and resolve conflicts in our
favor. Um And we also reason to excuse justify
and rationalize our behavior so that we look good
to our peers. That's basically what reasoning is all
about according to, to uh Hugo Mercier. Um There
are all sorts of nuances here. And II, I
don't want to give a whole overview of his
theory, but that's the gist. Um And uh if
we see reasoning as fundamentally about arguing and rationalizing,
then we can see why these hyper reasoning weirdos
are so obsessed with the meaning of life. What
they're doing is they're finding a way to win
arguments with one another and rationalize their lives. That
is they're trying to come up with a justification
for, for their life choices, the, you know, the
justification for why they support the uh haphazard and
arbitrary political coalition, they support uh they're trying to
come up with a rationalization for why they're alive
at all. Uh You know, that's, that's a big
question, you know, why don't, why don't we commit
suicide? Uh I think the answer is there are,
there are clear evolutionary reasons why we would be
afraid of committing suicide. Uh But that doesn't sound
as pretty as, oh, I'm alive because I want
to pursue some high minded value or I want
to make the world a better place or pursue
justice or equality or um or any other uh
value. So I think basically what, what uh conversations
and debates about the meaning of life are, are,
are a kind of status competition. Uh And the
status competition might take a variety of forms. Um
uh It might take the form of virtue, status
or, or wisdom, status um or, or, or whatever,
but I think that's ultimately what it's all about
uh and uh apologies for that cynical view. But
I think it might help with uh with existential
angst to realize that your existential angst is uh
sometimes uh bullshit.
No, I mean, at least as far as I'm
concerned, we do not have to apologize at all
also because I mean, o of course, again, uh
it's fine uh to be interested in all these
sorts of questions and I am interested in them
myself and I explore them on the show several
times. So, but uh I guess that the BS
part here is really about the fact that people
and it's not their fault to some extent because
most of these happens subconsciously. So people are not
really do not really have direct access to what's
motivating them to perform a particular kind of behavior
in this case showing off intellectually, for example. Uh
BUT the BS is really about them thinking that
the arguments they're making uh the law they bring
to the table. And all of that is really
about the content of what they're saying and not
about, for example, increasing their status or uh so
socially signaling their intellectual prowess or something like that
also, because lots of that uh as a clear
fitness benefits. Right.
Yes, exactly. Yeah. If we're trying to explain AAA
costly human behavior, a costly investment of time and
energy, I think we have to try to explain
it first in ways that make evolutionary sense and
the way you describe it as social signaling and
status competition, that makes a whole lot of evolutionary
sense. The idea that we are intrinsically interested in
the abstract meaning of life for its own sake
makes no evolutionary sense whatsoever. So I think all
else equal, we should favor the theories and explanations
that make more evolutionary sense because we know evolution
is true. Uh And all of our theories should
ultimately be consistent with it. And that's, that's my
pitch for Darwinian cynicism.
At the end of the day, the question would
be if there was no social aspect to any
of these, would you still really be interested in
thinking about the meaning of life or arguing about
the meaning of life and other questions like that?
Right? It's,
it's interesting. Uh Part of me wants to say
yes and part of me wants to say no
because I know my own inner press secretary wants
me to deny that I'm, I'm motivated by these
ugly things but, but my rational intellectual brain says
yes, of course. Um So, uh yes, ultimately, I'm
a human being too. Um I'm just as motivated
by these uh social signaling and status motivations as
any other human. And I'm just as motivated to
deny that I have these motivations as any. I
think that's a big part of a big part
of our, of our status competition. Is denying that
we're competing for status because if you come out
as a status seeker, as a social climber, as
a vous narcissist, uh you're going to look bad,
you're going to lose status. So overtly seeking status
lowers your status, which means that we have to
seek status covertly and we have to be in
denial about it. We have to come up with
pretty uh uh rationalizations and self flattering stories about
what we're really pursuing, which is not status but
some high minded, sacred value like truth or justice
or beauty or authenticity or whatever. Um And that's
where a lot of our bullshit comes from, I
think is, is trying to cover up the ugly
facts of our status competition and uh present them
as pretty and impartially altruistic and benevolent uh ironically
for the purpose of winning those very same status
competitions.
Yeah. And perhaps even this entire conversation is just
boils down to status seeking
ultimately. Sadly, yes, which isn't to say it's bad.
So one thing I've, I've, I'm coming to terms
with is that just because something is bullshit or,
or is a status game doesn't mean it's bad.
Uh Because if, if I were to take that
view, then I would have to think that everything
is, is bad and that is, is, is an
unlivable philosophy. So I, the way I think about
it is yes, what we're, what we're doing here
is ultimately a kind of status game that doesn't
mean it's bad and that doesn't mean it's not
useful and it doesn't mean it's not improving the
world in some way. Certainly we're going to be
biased to think that it's useful and that it's
improving the world in, in, in some way. Uh,
BUT just because we're biased to think that doesn't
mean it's, it's not true.
So, another thing that you wrote about in one
of your posts, uh is, uh and earlier, I've
asked you about this, at least to some extent
when I asked you about moral foundations theory. But
what function the morality serve exactly because we have
this idea or this common idea that morality is
really about making us good or better people. But
is that really what morality is about?
Yeah. So I don't think it's what it's uh
about. Um So I have a, a post on
everything is bullshit called morality is not nice. Uh
In which I argue that morality is not, in
fact nice. Uh It's quite mean. Um If you
think about all of the awful stuff that has
happened throughout history, uh It has all had a
very high minded moral justification, purges pogroms, inquisitions, genocides,
um Eugenics, uh uh uh conquests, colonialization. Um uh
YOU name it, it all comes accompanied with immoral
justification. We cannot commit injustice without thinking we're pursuing
justice, we cannot behave immorally without thinking we're behaving
morally. Uh We need our moral justifications and our
moral rationalizations in order to effectively mobilize groups against
rivals. Um So that is what I think a
lot of morality is about. Um IT'S about mobilizing
groups against rivals. And the way we do that
is by creating self serving narratives that frame the
group as morally superior and the rivals as morally
inferior. Um And uh I think way too much
of the scholarly literature on morality takes an overly
sunny view of what it's all about. Um That
is if you think about morality from a Darwinian
perspective, ultimately, it exists because it, it helped our
ancestors out compete their rivals. That is uh ancestors
who had the genes for morality did better, got
more stuff than ancestors who didn't have those genes.
And then you have to ask yourself, well, how
did they get more stuff than their non moral
rivals? Well, there are only so many ways, right?
They could either physically exclude them from that stuff,
just, just uh not interact with them or, or,
or just avoid them. That's not very nice. They
could uh violently exclude them, they could hurt them
or kill them, not very nice. Um They could
lie to them and, and to, to keep them
away. That that's another tactic. Uh Really, there's no
way that one group of primates can get more
stuff than another group of primates systematically throughout evolutionary
history without being mean to that other group of
primates. There's just no way to do it. So
I think morality, while it is very much about
cooper operation, as a lot of scholars have argued,
it also must necessarily have a competitive side. That
is there must be some kind of competition at
the heart of it. Yes, we co-operate, but we
co-operate to outcompete our rivals. Yes, we try to
be to, to show off our virtue and to,
and to be good cooper partners. But what we're
doing there is we're competing with other people to
be better co-operative partners than they are. And I
think too often the competitive side of morality has
been ignored in favor of the co-operative side. Ironically,
because that serves the functions of morality. That is
if I'm trying to mobilize a larger group than
my rivals, I have to make it seem like
my moral agenda is better for more people than
it really is that it's more sunny and co-operative
than it really is that it's less ugly and
dark and competitive than it really is in order
to rally more people to my side and away
from the other side. So that's what I think
uh morality is about at the end of the
day. Um It's just as much about competition as
it is about cooper operation and it is, I
think the leading cause of immorality in our species.
I think it is the leading cause of cruelty
of violence. Uh There's an excellent book called Virtuous
Violence by uh Lan Fis Conte Re arguing. Uh,
THAT pretty much all violence around the world has
a moral justification. It's all done in the name
of morality. And that far more violence is done
by normal people who think they're doing the right
thing than, uh, is committed by sociopaths. Um, AND
so I think we really need to have a
reckoning with morality. Uh, AND the role it plays
in our society. Mhm.
Yeah, I, I mean, I was just about to
mention that book Virtues Violence and I talked about
about it with Alan Fisk back in late 2018
or early 2019, something like that on the show.
Uh And yeah, it's, it's a very compelling argument
that he and his co-author make there, right? But
that, I mean, when, for example, uh you want
to uh take revenge or something like that and
you morally justify your revenge or you base some
sort of uh individual or collective action on morality
and on being wronged, for example, that uh more
easily can lead, you can lead you and your
fellow, I mean, allies to commit atrocious acts, right?
Like for example, even in some cases, genocide and
stuff like that.
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. Um I, I have no descent
to your opinion.
OK. So let's get into one of the last
topics here. So earlier you mentioned at a certain
point, social paradoxes. So what, what are social paradoxes?
What does that mean? Exactly.
Yeah. So it's, it's usually good to give a
few examples of social paradoxes rather than, than give
you the definition. I think that'll be easier to
understand what it is. I'm talking about. So here,
I'll give you a few examples. Um We um
try very hard to make people think that we
don't care what they think. Um We uh rebel
against social norms in the exact same way as
everyone else. Um We uh authentically express our true
selves, not who society wants us to be because
that is ultimately who society wants us to be.
Um We uh um oppose virtue signaling to signal
our virtue. Uh We um bravely defy social norms
so that people will praise us. Um We uh
um avoid being manipulative um to get people to
do what we want them to do. Uh We
uh where we avoid being defensive uh in order
to ultimately defend ourselves. Uh Those are just a
few examples of social paradoxes. What's the common thread
to all of them? The common thread is that
they ultimately involve a uh a signal that is
concealed from both the signaler and the recipient. That
is the virtue signaler does not know that they
are a virtue signaler. Uh And neither do the
recipients who award them virtue. If they thought of
them as virtue signalers, they wouldn't award them virtue,
they would think they were, you know, narcissistic or,
or whatever, right? Um The brave norm, violator does
not know that they're actually, in fact, just conforming
to the norms of their particular subculture. And neither
do the members of that subculture, the authentic person
who's authentically expressing their true self, uh, does not
know that they're behaving exactly how society wants them
to behave and neither does the society who praises
them as authentic. Right. So these are signals being
sent that are concealed from both the signaler and
the recipient.
A and so why is it that uh things
like status seeking and virtue signaling have to occur
uh covertly for them to work?
Yeah. So the answer is kind of complicated. Uh
So I think it has to do with um
are a couple of cognitive abilities. We have one
ability is that we are just eagerly in search
of information about a person's character. We are, are,
you know, likely to draw all sorts of inferences
about them from the subtlest things they say are
and, and, and the subtlest behaviors they engage in.
Uh WE, we want to know what kind of
person I want to know what kind of person
you are. And I'm going to judge you in
all sorts of ways unconsciously, unconsciously and draw inferences,
you know, you said this thing that means that
you're this type of person. So that's what I
call QE based inferences using others behaviors as a
cue to their, their underlying traits. Uh And then
there's uh recursive mentalis. So that's the ability to
get inside other other people's heads. Um AND think
about what, what they might be thinking about, uh
uh or what they might want or what they
might have intended. And the recursive part comes from
embedding mental states inside other mental states. So, for
example, um I want you to think that I'm
smart, but I don't want you to think that
I want you to think that I'm smart because
if you thought that you would think I was
a douche, right? So that's an example of recursive
mentalis. Their thoughts about thoughts, you know, beliefs about
desires, beliefs about desires, about thoughts, uh beliefs about
intentions, about thoughts, et cetera. That's a lot apologies.
Let me get back to social paradoxes. Why, why,
why does virtue signaling have to occur covertly? Well,
because being an overt virtue signaler trying to show
off your virtue, that's a signal. But it is
also at the same time become a cue of
one's underlying vanity and self absorption and selfishness and
pettiness. And perhaps even one's low status, maybe you're
insecure uh about yourself because you're low status and
you want to try to show off uh to
improve your status, whatever, whatever the reason, you know,
there we draw all sorts of nega negative inferences
about people when they overtly uh and conspicuously show
off their virtue. So that means that if we
want to gain virtue, we cannot let people know
that we're virtue signaling. We have to somehow signal
our virtue without making it seem like we're signaling
our virtue. Um And one way of doing that
is to hide the fact that we're virtue, virtue
signaling, not merely from the people we're signaling to,
but also from ourselves. That is we deceive ourselves.
We think we're not actually virtue signaling, we're, we're
pursuing some high minded value. Um And, and, and
the same story could be told about status. If
you're a status seeker, people draw negative inferences about
you, you're selfish, you're competitive, maybe you're low status
and insecure. We don't like status seekers. Uh So
in order to achieve status, we must conceal the
fact that we're trying to achieve status that is
status seeking must occur covertly and must be disguised
uh in high minded uh uh benevolent terms.
Uh uh I mean, and this will be my
last question. I was just about to ask you
if this would connect in any way to self
deception in the sense that if we self deceive,
then it would be easier for us to uh
behave in a way that would also lead to
uh let's say higher probability of uh faking our
true motives to other people. I mean, for other
people to not really read what we're trying to
do there. Right.
Yeah. So there's a whole literature on the evolution
of self deception and, and then that um it
makes us more successful at deceiving others if we
can deceive ourselves first. And I think the general
argument here is sound. Um, AND I think one
way I'd like to, I like to frame it
is in terms of a lawyer who practices their
opening statement to themselves before they deliver it to
the jury. Right. Maybe they'll practice in front of
the mirror. I don't know. Um, BUT they want
to make sure that they'll, they'll hear themselves giving
the arguments and if it's convincing to themselves and
if it sounds good to themselves, then it probably
sounds good to, to other people. And I think
we do that with ourselves. That is we, we,
we first try out arguments on ourselves before we
try them out on others. And what we're often
arguing about is how good we are or how
not bad we are. So we, we, we first
try to convince ourselves that we're good people that
we don't care about status. Uh And we rehearse
those arguments in our head. And we, and we
sometimes even even do things in the world that
help us gather evidence for that picture of ourselves.
We might actually donate to charity. So that later
on we can say, hey, I'm not a bad
person. I actually donate to charity, right? So we
convince ourselves through talking to ourselves in our head
and making arguments to ourselves in our head and
anticipating future scenarios where we might be called out.
And we also occasionally act in the world. So
as to accumulate evidence of our good character that
we can, um, use later on. Uh, IF we're
ever challenged, that is we prepare, uh, like lawyers
for, for trials that we may not ever be
in, but it's good to prepare in any case
because those trials could be hugely important, um, for
our fitness. Uh, THAT is if we're caught off
guard by an accusation or an insult, uh, and
we have no argument to give in response that's
going to be very bad for our fitness. We
want to prepare for those types of situations so
that we can defend ourselves and defend our character.
And I think a lot of our behavior is
oriented around that. So, yeah, that's how I construe
self deception. Um, IT'S not literally lying to ourselves.
It's more like bullshitting ourselves. Uh I would, I
would think of it more as, as, uh, self
bullshitting. We bullshit ourselves, uh in order to more
effectively bullshit others.
Ok, great. So let's end on that very cynical
note, I guess. But I, I, I'm also a
very big diogenes fan, so there's no problem with
that. So David, uh, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you on the internet?
Sure. Uh, YOU can find me on Twitter slash
X. Um, AT David pins off. Um, FEEL free
to DM me if you'd like, I'm always happy
to talk to people. Uh, AND, uh, you can
find my substack, uh, uh it's called Everything is
bullshit and it's just everything is bullshit.substack.com.
Great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description box of the interview. And look, thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been really fun to talk
to you.
Yep. It's been a pleasure. Thanks so much, Ricardo.
Oh, before we go, would you like to tell
people where they can find you on, on the
internet?
Sure. Uh You can find me on Twitter slash
X um at David Pins off. Um Feel free
to DM me if you'd like, I'm always happy
to talk to people. Uh And uh you can
find my substack. Uh uh IT'S called everything is
bullshit and it's just everything is bullshit.substack.com.
Great. So I'm leaving links to that in the
description box of the interview and look, thank you
so much again for taking the time to come
on the show. It's been really fun to talk
to you.
Yep. It's been a pleasure. Thanks so much, Ricardo.
Hi, everyone. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you like what I'm doing, please
consider supporting the show on Patreon or paypal. You
can find the links in the description box down
below. And if you like the interview, please share
it, leave a like hit the subscription button and
comment, the show is brought to you by N
Lights learning and development and differently. Check their website
at N lights.com. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Pero Larson, Jerry Mueller and Frederick Sunder
Bernard. So all of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whittenburg,
Arno Wolf, Tim Hoac, Eric Alan John Connors Philip
Forrest Connolly. Then the mere Robert winger ruin. Nai
Z Mark Nevs Colin hope Mikel Storm, Sam Andre
Francis for the Agn Fergal Ken Harl hero, Jonathan
Lebron and Eric Heinz Mark Smith Hummels are Wilson
Ruben Romani Charlotte Bli Nicola Barbaro Adam Hunt Palo
Stassi, Nele Bach Guy Madison, Gary G Hellman, Samo
Zal Adrian Yi Paul Tolentino, Julian Price Edward Hall,
Eden Bruner Douglas Fray, Franco Bartolo Gabriel Pan Cortez
or Lalit Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy and Smith
John Wiesman, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgina, Luke
Lo A Georges, Theo Chris Williams and Peter W
David Williams Di Costa, Anton Erickson Charles. Murray, Alex
Shower, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, bungalow atheists Larry D
Lee junior, Old Harri Bon, Starry Michael Bailey. Then
Sperber, Robert Grass is Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas
Radix Mark Temple, Thomas Dubner, Luke Neeson, Chris to
Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Nowicki Linda Brandon, Nicholas
Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentin Steinman, Per
Rawley, Kate Von Goler, Alexander, Robert Liam Donaway br
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jonas Herner, Ursula. Good enough
Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson and Mike
Levine. A special thanks to my producers is our
web, Jim Frank Luca Stefi Tom Ween Bernard. Yugi
Cortez Dixon Benedict Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carl Montenegro, Alick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers, Matthew lavender, Sergi Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.